William Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra is a play filled with political intrigue, power struggles, war and its consequences, and the plight of two desperately impassioned lovers. Although the play’s action is slightly more complicated
than Shakespeare’s other tragedies, Antony and Cleopatra provides an excellent means for students to study the multiple
levels of subject matter contained in historical dramas. Teachers of English, history, political science, social studies, geography, mythology, and drama may all benefit from the themes explored in this play. The play, therefore, provides many
opportunities for cross-curricular study.
The very mention of the two title characters, Antony and Cleopatra, conjures images of love and the desperate measures
taken in pursuit of love. Some have subtitled this play “The Greatest Love Story Ever Told.” Others argue that the play
does not depict love, but rather presents a desperate infatuation that destroys a great Roman leader and a noble Egyptian
queen. With either interpretation, the play offers a compelling love story that will intrigue students of any age or skill
level. Additional themes of divided power, battles with formidable forces, and manipulative enemies and subordinates provide suspense and action. The juxtaposition of love and war is neatly wrapped in Shakespeare’s poetic language, thereby
providing a literary work that is compelling and eloquent.
The play at first appears quite complex with inconsistent character behavior, such as Cleopatra’s many mood swings. A
sprawling location for the play’s action also complicates events as they occur on three different continents and on the seas
that divide these lands. Once character behavior is analyzed and questions are posed concerning motives, many of the
play’s hidden truths become known and reveal a familiar plot of love and war. Likewise, when the play’s action is visually recreated by acting out scenes, exploring staging, or being a member of an audience enjoying the play or a film version
of the play, many text references to geographical location, character motivation, and circumstance gain new meaning.
After all, plays are written to be performed and observed, not just read.
The following teacher’s guide provides materials to aid teachers in planning multi-layered exercises in text exploration.
The guide provides historical context and a plot synopsis. Following this literary overview, teachers will find activities suggested for student investigation of the play’s content before, during, and after reading. A list of discussion questions for
each act is also provided to assist teachers in developing class dialogues concerning the play’s action and thematic content.
